# LDP Research

We have been involved in a longitudinal research project on language
development since 2002 and it is ongoing with current support (from the
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development) through 2012.

## Overview and Objectives

Acquiring the ability to communicate using natural language and symbolic
gestures is a uniquely human capacity that underlies the exchange of
information among people. There is as yet no consensus concerning how
susceptible this process is to environmental and biological variation. Our
longitudinal study focuses on this issue, exploring the extent and the limits
of the language-learning process.

To examine language growth in the face of environmental variation we have
observed 60 children, selected to represent the demographic range of the
Chicago area, between the ages of 14 and 58 mos. and have continued to follow
them as they enter school and learn to read. Assessments have been made of
child and parent spontaneous speech, along with narrative and reading skills
from 5 to 10 years.

Using this data, growth curves will be constructed for each child to track
language and reading development across time, and to examine children's
linguistic and reading progress in the later years (5-10 yrs.) in relation to
their developmental trajectory during the early years (14-58 mos.).

To explore language growth in the face of biological variation 40 children with
unilateral brain injury who were observed from 14 to 58 mos. are being followed
from 5 to 10 years with an eye toward determining whether environmental
variation plays the same role in predicting their language and reading growth
as it does in children who have not suffered brain injury.

Along with traditional measures, the gesturing of our child subjects is being
examined to determine whether children who are delayed in speech relative to
their peers use gesture to compensate for those delays.

We are also using fMRI techniques to assess the brain bases underlying
linguistic and gestural competence.

Our work builds on five years of longitudinal data in a diverse sample, and
thus offers a unique opportunity to explore the impact that early language
learning has on the oral and written skills that children develop once
schooling has begun. This data has the potential to shed light on the factors
that contribute to the gap between children from high vs. low socio-economic
groups on the first day of school, and may even point to ways of shrinking that
gap.

See the [publications](https://ldp.uchicago.edu/publications) section of the LDP website for scholarly articles published based on our data and the [news](https://ldp.uchicago.edu/news) for articles discussing our research.
